README.adoc, before:

= OpenLDAP Playground
Álvaro López Medina <alopezme@redhat.com>
v1.0, 2022-10
// Metadata
:description: This document shows how to deploy a basic openldap container and a UI and initialize it with some users and groups.
:keywords: openldap, ldap, playground, red hat
// Create TOC wherever needed
:toc: macro
:sectanchors:
:sectnumlevels: 2
:sectnums: 
:source-highlighter: pygments
:imagesdir: images
// Start: Enable admonition icons
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]
ifndef::env-github[]
:icons: font
endif::[]
// End: Enable admonition icons
// Create the Table of contents here
toc::[]

== Introduction

https://openldap.org/[OpenLDAP] is a free, open-source implementation of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) developed by the OpenLDAP Project.

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4511[LDAP] stands for Lightweight Directory Access Protocol. As the name suggests, it is a lightweight protocol for accessing directory services, specifically X.500-based directory services. LDAP runs over TCP/IP or other connection oriented transfer services. 

=== Server

In order to simplify installation and usage, we are going to use a public https://hub.docker.com/r/bitnami/openldap/[OpenLDAP container image] published by Bitnami.

To deploy OpenLDAP in a simple manner, we are going to use the command `podman-compose`. https://docs.docker.com/compose/[Compose] is a tool for defining and running multi-container applications. With Compose, you use a YAML file to configure your application's services. Then, with a single command, you create and start all the services from your configuration. 

NOTE: Podman compose is included in your default podman installation.


=== Client utilities

It is strongly recommended to install https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/fedora/latest/system-administrators-guide/servers/Directory_Servers/#s2-ldap-installation[`openldap-clients`], which is a package containing the command line utilities for viewing and modifying directories on an LDAP server. Amongst others, you will have `ldapsearch` to search LDAP directory entries.


=== Web Interface

One of the downsides of OpenLDAP for beginners, compared with other LDAP solutions such as FreeIPA or MS Active Directory, is that it does not come with a default web console to configure and check users, groups, etc. For that purpose, there are many open source projects that can help us to solve that issue:

* https://phpldapadmin.sourceforge.net/wiki/index.php/Main_Page[*phpLDAPadmin*]: It provides easy, anywhere-accessible, multi-language administration for your LDAP server. The problem is that its development seems stale on GitHub and might not provide the latest features or bug solutions.
* https://github.com/dnknth/ldap-ui[*ldap-ui*]: This is a minimal interface, but it is under constant development.

Therefore, we are going to try *ldap-ui*, which might be simpler and fancier.



== Basic podman compose commands

=== Run the server

Run the server in detach mode, which is running the container in the background, printing the new container name.

[source, bash]
----
podman-compose up --detach
----

=== Obtain the LDAP logs
[source, bash]
----
podman logs --follow openldap
----

=== Shutdown and remove the container
[source, bash]
----
podman-compose down
----


NOTE: Check the server config with `curl -v -u "$USER:$PASS" --digest http://localhost:11222/rest/v2/server/config`


== Using ldapsearch to check users list

.Using LDAP
[source, bash]
----
# List all
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword

# List all users
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword "objectclass=person" 

# List all groups
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword "objectclass=groupOfNames"

# List all users of the Admins group
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "cn=admins,ou=groups,dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword member
----
////

.Using LDAPS
[source, bash]
----
# List all Users
ldapsearch -H ldaps://localhost:1636 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword


ldapsearch -x -D "ldap_user" -w "user_passwd" -b "cn=jdoe,dc=example,dc=local" -h ldap_host **memberof**

# Request StartTLS
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:10389 -Z -x -b "ou=people,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -D "cn=admin,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -w GoodNewsEveryone "(objectClass=inetOrgPerson)"

# Enforce StartTLS
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:10389 -ZZ -x -b "ou=people,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -D "cn=admin,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -w GoodNewsEveryone "(objectClass=inetOrgPerson)"

# Enforce StartTLS with self-signed cert
LDAPTLS_REQCERT=never ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:10389 -ZZ -x -b "ou=people,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -D "cn=admin,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -w GoodNewsEveryone "(objectClass=inetOrgPerson)"
----
////



== Known issues

The OpenLDAP container still requires privileged permissions to execute. If not, the `ldif` file is not mounted with the correct permissions and you obtain an error like this:

[source, console]
----
podman logs openldap
 15:44:02.04 INFO  ==> ** Starting LDAP setup **
 15:44:02.06 INFO  ==> Validating settings in LDAP_* env vars
 15:44:02.06 INFO  ==> Initializing OpenLDAP...
 15:44:02.08 INFO  ==> Creating LDAP online configuration
 15:44:02.09 INFO  ==> Starting OpenLDAP server in background
 15:44:03.11 INFO  ==> Configure LDAP credentials for admin user
 15:44:03.14 INFO  ==> Adding LDAP extra schemas
ls: cannot open directory '/ldifs': Permission denied
 15:44:03.17 INFO  ==> Creating LDAP default tree
 15:44:04.24 INFO  ==> ** LDAP setup finished! **
----



== References


* https://devconnected.com/how-to-search-ldap-using-ldapsearch-examples/[How To Search LDAP using ldapsearch].
* https://github.com/wfink/infinispan.playground.security[Wolf's LDAP Playground].
* https://github.com/bitnami/containers/blob/main/bitnami/openldap/README.md[OpenLDAP container Readme file].


* Red Hat Data Grid documentation: 
** https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_data_grid/8.3/html/data_grid_security_guide/security-realms#ldap-security-realms_security-realms[LDAP Server Security Realm].
** https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_data_grid/8.3/html-single/configuring_data_grid_caches/index#configuring-cache-authorization_security-authorization[Securing caches].
** https://access.redhat.com/webassets/avalon/d/red-hat-data-grid/8.3/configdocs/infinispan-config-13.0.html#[Cache Security Schema].


== How to deploy on OCP

* https://docs.bitnami.com/tutorials/create-openldap-server-kubernetes/[Create An OpenLDAP server with Bitnami Containers on Kubernetes].
* https://www.talkingquickly.co.uk/installing-openldap-kubernetes-helm[Installing OpenLDAP on Kubernetes with Helm].

Commit message:

:art: Add Apache Studio documentation

README.adoc, after:

= OpenLDAP Playground
Álvaro López Medina <alopezme@redhat.com>
v1.0, 2022-10
// Metadata
:description: This document shows how to deploy a basic openldap container and a UI and initialize it with some users and groups.
:keywords: openldap, ldap, playground, red hat
// Create TOC wherever needed
:toc: macro
:sectanchors:
:sectnumlevels: 2
:sectnums: 
:source-highlighter: pygments
:imagesdir: images
// Start: Enable admonition icons
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]
ifndef::env-github[]
:icons: font
endif::[]
// End: Enable admonition icons
// Create the Table of contents here
toc::[]

== Introduction

https://openldap.org/[OpenLDAP] is a free, open-source implementation of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) developed by the OpenLDAP Project.

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4511[LDAP] stands for Lightweight Directory Access Protocol. As the name suggests, it is a lightweight protocol for accessing directory services, specifically X.500-based directory services. LDAP runs over TCP/IP or other connection oriented transfer services. 

=== Server

In order to simplify installation and usage, we are going to use a public https://hub.docker.com/r/bitnami/openldap/[OpenLDAP container image] published by Bitnami.

To deploy OpenLDAP in a simple manner, we are going to use the command `podman-compose`. https://docs.docker.com/compose/[Compose] is a tool for defining and running multi-container applications. With Compose, you use a YAML file to configure your application's services. Then, with a single command, you create and start all the services from your configuration. 

NOTE: Podman compose is included in your default podman installation.


=== Client utilities

It is strongly recommended to install https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/fedora/latest/system-administrators-guide/servers/Directory_Servers/#s2-ldap-installation[`openldap-clients`], which is a package containing the command line utilities for viewing and modifying directories on an LDAP server. Amongst others, you will have `ldapsearch` to search LDAP directory entries.


=== Web Interface

One of the downsides of OpenLDAP for beginners, compared with other LDAP solutions such as FreeIPA or MS Active Directory, is that it does not come with a default web console to configure and check users, groups, etc. For that purpose, there are many open source projects that can help us to solve that issue:

* https://phpldapadmin.sourceforge.net/wiki/index.php/Main_Page[*phpLDAPadmin*]: It provides easy, anywhere-accessible, multi-language administration for your LDAP server. The problem is that its development seems stale on GitHub and might not provide the latest features or bug solutions.
* https://github.com/dnknth/ldap-ui[*ldap-ui*]: This is a minimal interface, but it is under constant development.

Therefore, we are going to try *ldap-ui*, which might be simpler and fancier.



== Basic podman compose commands

=== Run the server

Run the server in detach mode, which is running the container in the background, printing the new container name.

[source, bash]
----
podman-compose up --detach
----

=== Obtain the LDAP logs
[source, bash]
----
podman logs --follow openldap
----

=== Shutdown and remove the container
[source, bash]
----
podman-compose down
----


NOTE: Check the server config with `curl -v -u "$USER:$PASS" --digest http://localhost:11222/rest/v2/server/config`


== Using `ldapsearch` to check the users list

.Using LDAP
[source, bash]
----
# List all
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword

# List all users
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword "objectclass=person" 

# List all groups
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword "objectclass=groupOfNames"

# List all users of the Admins group
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:1389 -x -b "cn=admins,ou=groups,dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword member
----
////

.Using LDAPS
[source, bash]
----
# List all Users
ldapsearch -H ldaps://localhost:1636 -x -b "dc=acme,dc=org" -D "cn=admin,dc=acme,dc=org" -w adminpassword


ldapsearch -x -D "ldap_user" -w "user_passwd" -b "cn=jdoe,dc=example,dc=local" -h ldap_host **memberof**

# Request StartTLS
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:10389 -Z -x -b "ou=people,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -D "cn=admin,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -w GoodNewsEveryone "(objectClass=inetOrgPerson)"

# Enforce StartTLS
ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:10389 -ZZ -x -b "ou=people,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -D "cn=admin,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -w GoodNewsEveryone "(objectClass=inetOrgPerson)"

# Enforce StartTLS with self-signed cert
LDAPTLS_REQCERT=never ldapsearch -H ldap://localhost:10389 -ZZ -x -b "ou=people,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -D "cn=admin,dc=planetexpress,dc=com" -w GoodNewsEveryone "(objectClass=inetOrgPerson)"
----
////


== Apache Directory Studio

For most of you, LDAP and LDIF files are something new and you would appreciate having an IDE to modify these files. Apache Directory Studio is a complete directory tooling platform intended to be used with any LDAP server however it is particularly designed for use with ApacheDS.

NOTE: This should not be confused with ApacheDS, which is an extensible and embeddable directory server entirely written in Java. While Apache Directory Studio is "the web interface" for LDAP servers.

Download the RPM from this https://directory.apache.org/studio/download/download-linux.html[website]. Untar the downloaded file and execute the ApacheDirectoryStudio file.

Now, you have a graphical interface to design your LDAP structure and export it as LDIF files.

.Apache Studio main view
image::apache-directory-studio.png["Apache Studio main view"]


== Known issues

The OpenLDAP container still requires privileged permissions to execute. If not, the `ldif` file is not mounted with the correct permissions and you obtain an error like this:

[source, console]
----
podman logs openldap
 15:44:02.04 INFO  ==> ** Starting LDAP setup **
 15:44:02.06 INFO  ==> Validating settings in LDAP_* env vars
 15:44:02.06 INFO  ==> Initializing OpenLDAP...
 15:44:02.08 INFO  ==> Creating LDAP online configuration
 15:44:02.09 INFO  ==> Starting OpenLDAP server in background
 15:44:03.11 INFO  ==> Configure LDAP credentials for admin user
 15:44:03.14 INFO  ==> Adding LDAP extra schemas
ls: cannot open directory '/ldifs': Permission denied
 15:44:03.17 INFO  ==> Creating LDAP default tree
 15:44:04.24 INFO  ==> ** LDAP setup finished! **
----



== References


* https://devconnected.com/how-to-search-ldap-using-ldapsearch-examples/[How To Search LDAP using ldapsearch].
* https://github.com/wfink/infinispan.playground.security[Wolf's LDAP Playground].
* https://github.com/bitnami/containers/blob/main/bitnami/openldap/README.md[OpenLDAP container Readme file].


* Red Hat Data Grid documentation: 
** https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_data_grid/8.3/html/data_grid_security_guide/security-realms#ldap-security-realms_security-realms[LDAP Server Security Realm].
** https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_data_grid/8.3/html-single/configuring_data_grid_caches/index#configuring-cache-authorization_security-authorization[Securing caches].
** https://access.redhat.com/webassets/avalon/d/red-hat-data-grid/8.3/configdocs/infinispan-config-13.0.html#[Cache Security Schema].


== How to deploy on OCP

* https://docs.bitnami.com/tutorials/create-openldap-server-kubernetes/[Create An OpenLDAP server with Bitnami Containers on Kubernetes].
* https://www.talkingquickly.co.uk/installing-openldap-kubernetes-helm[Installing OpenLDAP on Kubernetes with Helm].
